---
title: Using MOLGENIS DataSHIELD to analyse 107,884 mother-child dyads from 7 European birth cohorts across 6 countries highlighting consistent tendency for children
  from disadvantaged SECs to be at greater risk of asthma.
category: publication
citation: 'Pinot de Moira et al (2025) Understanding Social Inequalities in Childhood Asthma: Quantifying the Mediating Role of Modifiable Early-Life Risk Factors in Seven European Birth
  Cohorts.  Allergy Clin Immunol Pract.'
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2025.02.032
---

# Abstract
## Background: 

Children growing up in disadvantaged socioeconomic circumstances (SECs) have an increased risk of asthma.

## Objective: 

To increase our understanding of the pathways to inequalities in asthma and potential targets for intervention by (1) examining how the social 
patterning of asthma and its early-life risk factors varies across countries and (2) quantifying the mediation of observed inequalities by early-life risk factors.

## Methods: 

We used data for 107,884 mother-child dyads from 7 European birth cohorts across 6 countries. Maternal education was the primary exposure measure 
of early-life SECs. The outcome was current asthma in childhood (3-12 years). Inequalities were examined using multivariable regression and random effects meta-analysis. The mediating effects of early-life risk factors (maternal smoking during pregnancy, adverse birth outcomes, and breastfeeding duration) were examined using counterfactual mediation analysis.

# Results: 

In meta-analysis, children of mothers with low/medium versus high education had a 17% (95% confidence interval: 8%-27%, I2 = 21.6%) increased risk 
of asthma. Cohort-specific risk ratios ranged between 1.07 (0.97-1.18, Danish National Birth Cohort, Denmark) and 1.61 (1.08-2.40, study on the pre- & early postnatal determinants of child health & development, France). The early-life risk factors were similarly socially patterned, but with greater heterogeneity across cohorts (I2 range = 66.2%-95.3%). The mediation analysis suggested that these factors play a relevant role in mediating observed inequalities (proportion mediated range: 0.08-0.72).

## Conclusions: 

There was a consistent tendency for children from disadvantaged SECs to be at greater risk of asthma in the European cohorts examined. Our 
results suggest that early-life risk factors partially mediate these disparities and, therefore, that public health interventions in the perinatal period may help to address inequalities in asthma.
